18.702 SUBJECT DESCRIPTION

Group Representations, Rings, Fields

February 6, 2013

Prerequisite: 18.701

Formal Course Requirements: Weekly problem sets will be graded. There will be
three quizzes during the regular class hour, and no ﬁnal exam. To receive a passing grade
for the course, you must submit solutions to at least 75% of the problems on the weekly
assignments. Assuming that this is done, weighting in the ﬁnal grade will be roughly 25%
for the homework and 25% for each quiz.

Quizzes will be given during the usual class hour, 10-11, on the following days:

Wed Mar 6, Wed Apr 10, Wed May 8.

If the class isn’t too big, we’ll have the quizzes in our classroom, 32-155.

Preparation: The course outline contains reading assignments and exercises on the topic
of each lecture. I rely on you to do the reading. Do it ahead of time if possible. Work the
problems in the course outline, but do not turn them in. The problems on the quizzes will
be at a similar level. See me if you have serious diﬃculties with the ones in the outline.

Homework: The weekly problem sets are perhaps the most important part of the course.
They contain problems that are lengthier and more diﬃcult than those in the course outline,
and they require serious thought. You may work in groups on these problem sets. However,
the solutions that you hand in must be written entirely by you. Consulting existing solutions,
such as from previous years’ problem sets or from the web, is not permitted. Written
assignments must be handed in on the day they are due.

Please:

• List your collaborators at the top of your assignment.
• Use a separate sheet of paper for each problem. !Put your name on each sheet!
• Turn the assignments in to room 2-285 by 4:30 on the due date. This will allow the staﬀ
to leave promptly at 5.

After the assignments are graded, some of your solutions will be copied and posted in a
glass case by room 2-163.

Text: Artin, Algebra, 2nd ed. You can use the ﬁrst edition, but the exercise numbers will
be diﬀerent.

Staﬀ: Instructor: Mike Artin, 2-239, Extension 3-3689. Oﬃce Hours M 1-2, W 2-3.
See me after class to set up an appointment if you can’t make these hours.

TA: to be announced

Web address: http://math.mit.edu/classes/18.702/

