Design and Analysis of Algorithms
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Profs. Shaﬁ Goldwasser, Piotr Indyk, and Ronitt Rubinfeld

September 5, 2013
6.046J/18.410J
Handout 1

Course Information

This handout describes basic course information and policies. Most of the sections will be
useful throughout the course. The main items to pay attention to NOW are:

1. Please make sure you are signed up through Stellar, and talk to the TAs if there is a problem.

2. Please note the dates of the quizzes and make sure to keep these dates free.

3. Please note the collaboration policy for homeworks.

4. Please note the grading policy, and in particular, the penalty for missed problems.

2

1 Staff

Handout 1: Course Information

The lecturers for this course are Prof. Shaﬁ Goldwasser, Prof. Piotr Indyk, and Prof. Ronitt
Rubinfeld. Please see the stellar website for names and contact information for lecturers and
teaching assistants.
The course website is at:
https://stellar.mit.edu/S/course/6/fa13/6.046/

The staff e-mail is: 6046-tas@mit.edu

2 Registration for recitations

If you would like to switch the recitation assigned to you by the registrar, you can do so until
Monday, September 9, on the Stellar website. After September 9, please contact Nathaniel Arce
(codetaku@mit.edu). In the ﬁrst week of class, requests for changes will generally be approved if
space permits.

3 Prerequisites

This course is the header course for the MIT/EECS Engineering Concentration of Theory of Com-
putation. You are expected, and strongly encouraged, to have taken:
• 6.006 Introduction to Algorithms and
• Either 6.042J/18.062J Mathematics for Computer Science or 18.310 Principles of Applied
Mathematics
and received grades of C or better.
Petitions for waivers will be considered by the course staff. Students will be responsible for
material covered in prerequisites.

4 Lectures & Recitations

Lectures will be held in room 26-100 from 11:00 A .M .
to 12:30 P.M . on Tuesdays and Thurs-
days. You are responsible for material presented in lectures, including oral comments made by the
lecturer.
Students must also attend a one-hour recitation session each week. You are responsible for
material presented in recitation. Attendance in recitation has been well correlated in the past with
exam performance. Recitations also give you a more personalized opportunity to ask questions
and interact with the course staff. Your recitation instructor will assign your ﬁnal grade.
Recitations will be taught by the teaching assistants on Fridays.

Handout 1: Course Information

5 Problem sets

3

Six problem sets will be assigned during the semester. The course calendar, available from the
course webpage, shows the tentative schedule of assignments and due dates. The actual due date
will always be on the problem set itself. Homework must be turned in by 11:59 pm on the due
date.
• Late homework will generally not be accepted. If there are extenuating circumstances, you
should make prior arrangements with your recitation instructor. An excuse from the Dean’s
Ofﬁce will be required if prior arrangements have not been made. In all cases, late homework
must be submitted online on the course website.
• Each problem must be written up separately, since problems may be graded by separate
graders. Mark the top of each sheet with the following: (1) your name, (2) the name of your
recitation instructor, and the time your recitation section meets, (3) the question number, (4)
the names of any people you worked with on the problem (see Section 8), or “Collaborators:
none” if you solved the problem completely alone.
• Answers should be submitted online to the Stellar website in PDF format. Formatting your
problem set in LATEX will make it easier for us to read; however, any method of generating
the PDF is acceptable (including scanning handwritten documents) as long as it is clearly
legible.
• The problem sets includes exercises that should be solved but not handed in. These questions
are intended to help you master the course material and will be useful in solving the assigned
problems. Material covered in exercises will be tested on exams.

6 Guide to writing up homework

You should be as clear and precise as possible in your write-up of solutions. Understandability
of your answer is as desirable as correctness, because communication of technical material is an
important skill.
A simple, direct analysis is worth more points than a convoluted one, both because it is simpler
and less prone to error and because it is easier to read and understand. Sloppy answers will receive
fewer points, even if they are correct, so make sure that your handwriting and your thoughts are
legible. If writing your problem set by hand, it is a good idea to copy over your solutions to hand
in, which will make your work neater and give you a chance to do sanity checks and correct bugs.
If typesetting, reviewing the problem set while typing it in often has this effect. In either case,
going over your solution at least once before submitting it is strongly recommended.
You will often be called upon to “give an algorithm” to solve a certain problem. Your write-up
should take the form of a short essay. A topic paragraph should summarize the problem you are
solving and what your results are. The body of your essay should provide the following:

4

Handout 1: Course Information

1. A description of the algorithm in English and, if helpful, pseudocode.

2. At least one worked example or diagram to show more precisely how your algorithm works.

3. A proof (or indication) of the correctness of the algorithm.

4. An analysis of the running time of the algorithm.

Remember, your goal is to communicate. Graders will be instructed to take off points for convo-
luted and obtuse descriptions.

7 Grading policy

The ﬁnal grade will be based on six problem sets, one in-class quiz, one evening quiz, a ﬁnal during
ﬁnal exam week, and participation during the weekly recitation sections. Quiz 1 will be in class on
Tuesday, October 22, 11:00 A .M . to 12:30 P.M . in room 26-100. Quiz 2 will be held the evening
of Thursday, November 14, time TBD.
The grading breakdown is as follows:

25%
Problem sets
20%
In-class quiz
Evening quiz
25%
Final exam 30%

Although the problem sets account for only 25% of your ﬁnal grade, you are required to at least
attempt them. The following table shows the impact of failing to attempt problems:

Questions skipped
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 or more

Impact
None
One-hundredth of a letter grade
One-tenth of a letter grade
One-ﬁfth of a letter grade
One-fourth of a letter grade
One-third of a letter grade
One-half of a letter grade
One letter grade
Two letter grades
Fail

Please observe that this table is for questions skipped, not problem sets.

Handout 1: Course Information

8 Collaboration policy

5

The goal of homework is to give you practice in mastering the course material. Consequently, you
are encouraged to collaborate on problem sets. In fact, students who form study groups generally
do better on exams than do students who work alone. If you do work in a study group, however,
you owe it to yourself and your group to be prepared for your study group meeting. Speciﬁcally,
you should spend at least 30–45 minutes trying to solve each problem beforehand. If your group
is unable to solve a problem, talk to other groups or ask your recitation instructor.
You must write up each problem solution by yourself without assistance, however, even if
you collaborate with others to solve the problem. You are asked on problem sets to identify your
collaborators. If you did not work with anyone, you should write “Collaborators: none.” If you
obtain a solution through research (e.g., on the web), acknowledge your source, but write up the
solution in your own words. It is a violation of this policy to submit a problem solution that
you cannot orally explain to a member of the course staff. No collaboration whatsoever is
permitted on quizzes or exams.
Plagiarism and other dishonest behavior cannot be tolerated in any academic environment that
prides itself on individual accomplishment. If you have any questions about the collaboration pol-
icy, or if you feel that you may have violated the policy, please talk to one of the course staff.
Although the course staff is obligated to deal with cheating appropriately, we are more understand-
ing and lenient if we ﬁnd out from the transgressor himself or herself rather than from a third
party.

9 Textbook

The primary written reference for the course is the third edition of the textbook Introduction to
Algorithms by Cormen, Leiserson, Rivest, and Stein. In previous semesters the course has used
the ﬁrst or second edition of this text. We will be using material and exercise numbering from the
third edition, making earlier editions unsuitable as substitutes.
The textbook can be obtained from the MIT Coop, the MIT Press Bookstore, and at various
other local and online bookstores.

10 Course website

The course website contains links to electronic copies of handouts, corrections made to the course
materials, and special announcements. You should visit this site regularly to be aware of any
changes in the course schedule, updates to your instructors’ ofﬁce hours, etc. You will be informed
via the web page and/or email where and when the few handouts that are not available from the
web page can be obtained.
In addition, you should use the Stellar website to submit problem sets and check on your grades.

6

11 Extra help

Handout 1: Course Information

Based on the desires of the students, the teaching staff will offer regular ofﬁce hours. Details will
be discussed in recitation during the ﬁrst week of class. You may attend the ofﬁce hours of any TA
(not just your own).
Further help may be obtained through tutoring services. The MIT Department of Electrical En-
gineering and Computer Science provides one-on-one peer assistance in many basic undergraduate
Course VI classes. During the ﬁrst nine weeks of the term, you may request a tutor who will meet
with you for a few hours a week to aid in your understanding of course material. You and your
tutor arrange the hours that you meet, for your mutual convenience. This is a free service. More
information is available on the HKN web page:

https://hkn.mit.edu/tutoring/index.php

Tutoring is also available from the Tutorial Services Room (TSR) sponsored by the Ofﬁce of
Minority Education. The tutors are undergraduate and graduate students, and all tutoring sessions
take place in the TSR (Room 12-124) or the nearby classrooms. For further information, go to

http://web.mit.edu/tsr/www
This course has great material, so HAVE FUN!

