(LOLtheorist by user zzyzx-xyzzy at livejournal)

18.510 Introduction to Mathematical Logic and Set Theory

Course Information
Meetings: TR 2:30–4:00 in 4–153
There will be no class on October 15, November 26, or November 28.
Instructor: Henry Cohn
Oﬃce: E18–422 [I’m normally at Microsoft Research, so you won’t ﬁnd me here
except for oﬃce hours and other scheduled appointments.]
Oﬃce Hours: Monday 1–2, Tuesday 4–5, and by appointment
E-mail: cohn@microsoft.com
Grading: nine homework assignments 50%, two exams 25% each. I’ll drop the
lowest homework grade, so your best eight assignments will count for 6.25% each.
If you are on the border between two grades, I’ll give you the higher grade if
your performance improves towards the end of the course.
Due dates: homework is due at the beginning of class on the speciﬁed date.
Homework turned in later on the due date will be penalized 10%, and no
homework will be accepted after the due date, except because of medical or
family emergencies or religious obligation.
First exam: Thursday, October 17, during class.
Second exam: Thursday, December 5, during class.
Both will be closed-book exams. The second exam will focus on the second half
of the course (rather than being a comprehensive ﬁnal exam).
Prerequisites: in principle, none. Everything we do will be built up from scratch
and won’t depend on knowledge from previous courses.
In practice, 18.510
requires a certain level of mathematical maturity and comfort with abstraction
and proofs. If you have not taken a proof-based mathematics class before, you
will likely have trouble with this course.
Text: none. I’ll distribute some lecture notes, and I’m happy to suggest relevant
books. For the material on set theory towards the start of the course, here are
some references:

1

Naive set theory , by Paul R. Halmos
Basic set theory , by A. Shen and N. K. Vereshchagin
Set theory, logic and their limitations , by Mosh´e Machover

Attendance policy: you are adults, so I won’t take attendance or grade based on
it. However, because we won’t be following a textbook, I strongly recommend
attending class regularly. If you miss class, you should get notes from someone.

Collaboration policy: you should write up everything on your own, and of
course you should understand everything you turn in. It’s OK to consult with
classmates, but this should take the form of working together, rather than
copying completed solutions. It’s OK to use reference works, and it’s possible
that you will occasionally ﬁnd a solution to a homework problem, but you should
not deliberately search for solutions, and if you read a solution in the literature
you should explain it in your own words (rather than copying it verbatim). You
should not post homework questions to Q&A websites. If you collaborate with
someone on a problem or learn a solution from some other source, you should
acknowledge this on your problem set.

2

